We've been wrong about valgus knees in
the squat. For years, the fitness
industry has treated knee valgus in the
squat as a clear technical mistake. It's
where the knees cave in, and the
standard explanation has usually been
weak glutes. And I used to say that,
too. So, the obvious corrective cue for
this was to scream "knees out" and
include a ton of glute strengthening
exercises to correct that weakness. And
for some reason, no matter how loud we
scream or how much glute work we
prescribe, it never fixed the problem.
If we look at elite athletes performing
maximal lifts, we see knee valgus appear
in lifts performed by some of the
strongest athletes in the world. It
would be very difficult to argue that
these athletes have weak glutes. So, if
knee valgus isn't just weak glutes,
what's actually happening? Another
concept sometimes used to explain knee
valgus is the role of the adductor
magnus. Many experts point out that the
adductors become powerful hip extensors
in deep hip flexion. As the lifter
begins to stand up from the bottom of a
squat, the adductors extend the hip
while simultaneously producing hip
adduction. This can contribute to knees
moving inwards. This explanation has
some merit, but like the weak glute
explanation, it's too simplified to
fully explain what's happening. To
understand knee valgus properly, we need
to look at the entire system. Before
going further, we need to distinguish
between two very different situations
that are often grouped together. The
first is true knee collapse. This is
when the knees suddenly and excessively
cave inward because the lifter has lost
tension and coordination. The load is
too heavy, and the system breaks down.
This is clearly a technical problem and
should be corrected, probably starting
with reducing the weight. The second
situation is very different. At the
highest levels of lifting, we sometimes
see small, controlled inward movement of
the knees while the lifter maintains
full control of the lift. This is not a
collapse. It's a coordinated movement
pattern occurring under very high loads.
This discussion is referring to that
second scenario. Here is a video of the
world's best weightlifter, Lu Xiaojun,
with a world record clean and jerk of
207 kg. When we look at the lift from
the front view, we can see a small
amount of knee valgus as he begins
standing up with the bar. It happens a
little bit with the clean, and then it
happens a little bit more with the
overhead squat, which makes sense
because an overhead squat is a lot
harder than the front squat. At first
glance, this appears to confirm the
traditional belief that the knees are
collapsing. But when we examine the lift
from the side view, we see the hips
moving further back, which is with the
torso leaning slightly forward and an
increase of hip flexion before extension
begins. This is all a strategy to allow
the lifter to call on the glutes to help
lift the weight. If it didn't happen,
the torso would remain upright. His hips
would have stayed under the bar, which
would have meant that there was no
moment arm being created at the hip
joint, and therefore very little
contribution by the hips to get that
weight up. Or in other words, it would
have been all quads. If this happened,
his knees would have also tracked in
perfect alignment with his feet, which
you'll see with the lighter weights. But
as it's an absolute max and a world
record, his quads alone are unlikely to
be enough to complete the lift. So, what
appears to be knee collapse from the
front view is actually part of a
coordinated reorganization of the entire
system, allowing the lifter to recruit
the hips more aggressively to complete
that lift. The knees are not collapsing.
They're reacting to what the hips are
doing. We need to understand there's
more than one correct squat technique.
Different lifters with different goals
solve the squat using different
strategies. Some lifters prioritize
mechanical leverage. Two examples are
literally the best powerlifters in our
history, the goat, Ed Coan, and the
current strongest powerlifter on the
planet, Kalsom Engelbrekt. When they
squat, we see zero knee valgus. These
powerlifters have a different squat
strategy. They use a wider stance and a
more open hip position along with
different bracing strategy. This allows
the femur to remain externally rotated
and abducted while still achieving the
required depth for the sport, which is
an important factor because powerlifters
don't need to achieve the same
ass-to-grass depth that we see in
weightlifting. Nor do they need to
finish the lift with the weight over
their heads. And this changes the
position of the pelvis as well as the
way that we use our hips. From the side
view, this strategy keeps the hips
closer to the bar and reduces the hip
moment arm, allowing the lifter to
distribute the work efficiently across
the entire system. Of course, the glutes
are still working, but the objective is
not to isolate them. The objective is to
use the entire body as efficiently as
possible to move the heaviest load from
point A to point B. Weightlifters use a
different approach. Because they must
receive the bar extremely deep in the
clean or the snatch, their goal is to
descend as deep as possible so they can
catch the heaviest weight. The deeper
the lifter can receive the bar, the less
height they must pull it. To support the
bar in this position, weightlifters
typically brace with a more extended
spine, more elevated ribs, and more
anteriorly rotated pelvis. This bracing
strategy also helps support the bar
overhead, but it changes the way that
the femur behaves inside the hip joint.
When the pelvis is more anteriorly
tilted and the lifter attempts to
achieve maximum squat depth, the femur
often moves into internal rotation as
the hip flexes further. This allows the
hip joint to achieve the additional
flexion required to reach the deepest
possible squat position. Externally,
this can appear as the knees drifting
slightly inward. This is one reason
controlled knee valgus is commonly
observed in elite weightlifting.
Powerlifters, on the other hand, don't
need to reach this extreme depth. The
sport only requires the crease of the
hip to pass below the top of the knee.
Because the depth requirement is not as
deep, the same degree of internal
rotation is typically not required. Both
strategies can produce extremely strong
squats. They simply solve the mechanical
problem in different ways. Another piece
of the puzzle involves understanding how
the muscle generates force through
tension. A simple way of explaining this
is by using calf training as an example.
Looking at the gastrocnemius muscle, the
primary role of the gastrocnemius is
plantarflexion of the ankle. But because
the gastrocnemius crosses the knee
joint, it also contributes to knee
flexion. If the knees bent, slack is
introduced into the muscle, and its
ability to produce strong plantarflexion
is reduced. This is why we perform
standing calf raises when we want to
train the gastrocnemius. By keeping the
knee extended, we place tension on the
muscle before the contraction occurs.
Another way of thinking of it is to
consider that the way that we increase
tension on the muscle is to put it in
the position that we would stretch the
muscle. When we perform seated calf
raise with the knee bent, the
gastrocnemius is shortened, and its
contribution is reduced. This shifts the
emphasis towards the soleus, which only
crosses the ankle joint. Or in other
words, by changing the joint position,
we change how much tension is placed on
the muscle before it contracts. The same
principle applies to the glutes. The
gluteus maximus contributes to hip
extension, hip abduction, and hip
external rotation. If you put this all
together, it's basically the start
position of a wide stance squat or the
end position in a sumo deadlift. And
this is essentially placing the glutes
in the most shortened and contracted
position. To maximize tension on the
glutes, we need to do the opposite of
that: flexion, adduction, and internal
rotation. When you look at the bottom
position of a squat when valgus knees
has occurred, it starts to make sense.
This increases the tension in the glutes
before hip extension begins. Hip flexion
is the largest contributor to increasing
glute tension, but the abduction and
internal rotation components also play a
role. When the hips move back further
behind the line of force during a squat
or a hinge pattern, hip flexion
increases, and the glutes are placed
under greater tension before the
extension phase begins. This is why
movements such as Romanian deadlifts or
narrow stance low bar squats, where the
lifter is typically cued to push the
hips back, produces a strong glute
stimulus. This understanding also helps
explain something many lifters
experience. Some lifters adopt a wide
stance and are constantly cued to push
the knees out. No matter how often they
hear the cue, their knees continue to
drift inward. In many cases, this is not
because they lack the strength. It's
because their body is trying to
reorganize the movement. When the stance
doesn't match the lifter's mechanics,
the hips often shoot back, increasing
hip flexion and increasing the demand on
the glutes. From the perspective of the
pelvis, the knees travel inward as the
system attempts to recruit the hips more
aggressively. In this situation,
continuing to cue "knees out" may simply
be trying to fit a square peg into a
round hole. A more effective solution
may be to slightly narrow the stance and
reduce how much the toes are pointing
outwards. This allows the lifter to
maintain a more stacked position where
the foot, knee, and hip remain aligned
while still allowing the hips to
contribute strongly to the lift. This
discussion also provides insight into
how the glutes can be trained more
effectively. In strength sports like
powerlifting, the goal of the squat is
to move the heaviest load possible.
Lifters organize their body in a way
that maximizes mechanical efficiency and
distributes the load across the entire
system. Bodybuilding approaches the
problem differently. The goal is not
simply to lift the heaviest weight. The
goal is to place the target muscle under
the greatest amount of tension.
Movements that create greater hip
flexion and larger hip moment arms place
the glutes under greater tension before
the extension phase begins. This is why
exercises such as Romanian deadlift and
narrow stance squats often produce a
stronger glute stimulus [music] than
wider stance movements with a more
upright torso angle. Understanding this
distinction helps explain why the best
strategy for lifting the most weight is
not always the same strategy that
maximizes muscular development. For
years, the strength industry treated
knee valgus as a simple technical
mistake caused by weak glutes. But both
the research and the mechanics suggest
something more complex. Sometimes knee
valgus is a loss of control, but
sometimes it simply reflects how the
body reorganizes itself to recruit the
hips more aggressively when the load
becomes very high. Understanding that
difference allows coaches [music]
and lifters to move beyond rigid cues
and instead choose the strategy that
best fits their goals and their
individual mechanics. Knee valgus is not
always ideal, but it's also not always
the problem that we once thought it was.